1.7 Functions 
In C, a function is equivalent to a subroutine or function in Fortran, or a procedure or function 
in Pascal. A function provides a convenient way to encapsulate some computation, which can 
then be used without worrying about its implementation. With properly designed functions, it 
is possible to ignore how a job is done; knowing what is done is sufficient. C makes the sue of 
functions easy, convinient and efficient; you will often see a short function defined and called 
only once, just because it clarifies some piece of code.  
26 
So far we have used only functions like printf, getchar and putchar that have been 
provided for us; now it's time to write a few of our own. Since C has no exponentiation 
operator like the ** of Fortran, let us illustrate the mechanics of function definition by writing 
a function power(m,n) to raise an integer m to a positive integer power n. That is, the value of 
power(2,5) is 32. This function is not a practical exponentiation routine, since it handles 
only positive powers of small integers, but it's good enough for illustration.(The standard 
library contains a function pow(x,y) that computes xy.)  
Here is the function power and a main program to exercise it, so you can see the whole 
structure at once.  
   #include <stdio.h> 
   int power(int m, int n); 
    /* test power function */ 
    main() 
    { 
    } 
        int i; 
        for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i) 
            printf("%d %d %d\n", i, power(2,i), power(-3,i)); 
        return 0; 
    /* power:  raise base to n-th power; n >= 0 */ 
    int power(int base, int n) 
    { 
        int i,  p; 
        p = 1; 
        for (i = 1; i <= n; ++i) 
            p = p * base; 
        return p; 
    } 
A function definition has this form:  
return-type function-name(parameter declarations, if any) 
{ 
   declarations 
   statements 
} 
Function definitions can appear in any order, and in one source file or several, although no 
function can be split between files. If the source program appears in several files, you may 
have to say more to compile and load it than if it all appears in one, but that is an operating 
system matter, not a language attribute. For the moment, we will assume that both functions 
are in the same file, so whatever you have learned about running C programs will still work.  
The function power is called twice by main, in the line  
   printf("%d %d %d\n", i, power(2,i), power(-3,i)); 
Each call passes two arguments to power, which each time returns an integer to be formatted 
and printed. In an expression, power(2,i) is an integer just as 2 and i are. (Not all functions 
produce an integer value; we will take this up in Chapter 4
.)  
The first line of power itself,  
    int power(int base, int n) 
27 
declares the parameter types and names, and the type of the result that the function returns. 
The names used by power for its parameters are local to power, and are not visible to any 
other function: other routines can use the same names without conflict. This is also true of the 
variables i and p: the i in power is unrelated to the i in main.  
We will generally use parameter for a variable named in the parenthesized list in a function. 
The terms formal argument and actual argument are sometimes used for the same distinction.  
The value that power computes is returned to main by the return: statement. Any expression 
may follow return:  
   return expression; 
A function need not return a value; a return statement with no expression causes control, but 
no useful value, to be returned to the caller, as does ``falling off the end'' of a function by 
reaching the terminating right brace. And the calling function can ignore a value returned by a 
function.  
You may have noticed that there is a return statement at the end of main. Since main is a 
function like any other, it may return a value to its caller, which is in effect the environment in 
which the program was executed. Typically, a return value of zero implies normal 
termination; non-zero values signal unusual or erroneous termination conditions. In the 
interests of simplicity, we have omitted return statements from our main functions up to this 
point, but we will include them hereafter, as a reminder that programs should return status to 
their environment.  
The declaration  
    int power(int base, int n); 
just before main says that power is a function that expects two int arguments and returns an 
int. This declaration, which is called a function prototype, has to agree with the definition 
and uses of power. It is an error if the definition of a function or any uses of it do not agree 
with its prototype.  
parameter names need not agree. Indeed, parameter names are optional in a function 
prototype, so for the prototype we could have written  
    int power(int, int); 
Well-chosen names are good documentation however, so we will often use them.  
A note of history: the biggest change between ANSI C and earlier versions is how functions 
are declared and defined. In the original definition of C, the power function would have been 
written like this:  
28 
   /* power:  raise base to n-th power; n >= 0 */ 
   /*         (old-style version) */ 
   power(base, n) 
   int base, n; 
   { 
       int i, p; 
       p = 1; 
       for (i = 1; i <= n; ++i) 
           p = p * base; 
       return p; 
   } 
The parameters are named between the parentheses, and their types are declared before 
opening the left brace; undeclared parameters are taken as int. (The body of the function is 
the same as before.)  
The declaration of power at the beginning of the program would have looked like this:  
    int power(); 
No parameter list was permitted, so the compiler could not readily check that power was 
being called correctly. Indeed, since by default power would have been assumed to return an 
int, the entire declaration might well have been omitted.  
The new syntax of function prototypes makes it much easier for a compiler to detect errors in 
the number of arguments or their types. The old style of declaration and definition still works 
in ANSI C, at least for a transition period, but we strongly recommend that you use the new 
form when you have a compiler that supports it.  
Exercise 1.15. Rewrite the temperature conversion program of Section 1.2
for conversion.  
1.8 Arguments - Call by Value 
 to use a function 
One aspect of C functions may be unfamiliar to programmers who are used to some other 
languages, particulary Fortran. In C, all function arguments are passed ``by value.'' This 
means that the called function is given the values of its arguments in temporary variables 
rather than the originals. This leads to some different properties than are seen with ``call by 
reference'' languages like Fortran or with var parameters in Pascal, in which the called routine 
has access to the original argument, not a local copy.  
Call by value is an asset, however, not a liability. It usually leads to more compact programs 
with fewer extraneous variables, because parameters can be treated as conveniently initialized 
local variables in the called routine. For example, here is a version of power that makes use of 
this property.  
   /* power:  raise base to n-th power; n >= 0; version 2 */ 
   int power(int base, int n) 
   { 
       int p; 
       for (p = 1; n > 0; --n) 
           p = p * base; 
       return p; 
   } 
29 
The parameter n is used as a temporary variable, and is counted down (a for loop that runs 
backwards) until it becomes zero; there is no longer a need for the variable i. Whatever is 
done to n inside power has no effect on the argument that power was originally called with.  
When necessary, it is possible to arrange for a function to modify a variable in a calling 
routine. The caller must provide the address of the variable to be set (technically a pointer to 
the variable), and the called function must declare the parameter to be a pointer and access the 
variable indirectly through it. We will cover pointers in Chapter 5
.  
The story is different for arrays. When the name of an array is used as an argument, the value 
passed to the function is the location or address of the beginning of the array - there is no 
copying of array elements. By subscripting this value, the function can access and alter any 
argument of the array. This is the topic of the next section.  
1.9 Character Arrays 
The most common type of array in C is the array of characters. To illustrate the use of 
character arrays and functions to manipulate them, let's write a program that reads a set of text 
lines and prints the longest. The outline is simple enough:  
   while (there's another line) 
       if (it's longer than the previous longest) 
           (save it) 
           (save its length) 
print longest line 
This outline makes it clear that the program divides naturally into pieces. One piece gets a 
new line, another saves it, and the rest controls the process.  
Since things divide so nicely, it would be well to write them that way too. Accordingly, let us 
first write a separate function getline to fetch the next line of input. We will try to make the 
function useful in other contexts. At the minimum, getline has to return a signal about 
possible end of file; a more useful design would be to return the length of the line, or zero if 
end of file is encountered. Zero is an acceptable end-of-file return because it is never a valid 
line length. Every text line has at least one character; even a line containing only a newline 
has length 1.  
When we find a line that is longer than the previous longest line, it must be saved somewhere. 
This suggests a second function, copy, to copy the new line to a safe place.  
Finally, we need a main program to control getline and copy. Here is the result.  
